\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gjdoc.info
@c INTERNALS is used by md.texi to determine whether to include the
@c whole of that file, in the internals manual, or only the part
@c dealing with constraints, in the user manual.
@clear INTERNALS

@c NOTE: checks/things to do:
@c
@c -have bob do a search in all seven files for "mew" (ideally --mew,
@c  but i may have forgotten the occasional "--"..).
@c     Just checked... all have `--'!  Bob 22Jul96
@c     Use this to search:   grep -n '\-\-mew' *.texi
@c -item/itemx, text after all (sub/sub)section titles, etc..
@c -consider putting the lists of options on pp 17--> etc in columns or
@c  some such.
@c -overfulls.  do a search for "mew" in the files, and you will see
@c   overfulls that i noted but could not deal with.
@c -have to add text:  beginning of chapter 8

@c
@c anything else?                       --mew 10feb93

@include gcc-common.texi
@include version.texi

@settitle Using the Gjdoc Documentation System

@c Create a separate index for command line options.
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@paragraphindent 1

@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2005 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

This documentation is dual-licensed under the GNU Free Documentation
License and the GNU General Public License.

@table @emph
@item GNU Free Documentation License

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``Funding
Free Software'', the Front-Cover texts being (a) (see below), and with
the Back-Cover Texts being (b) (see below).  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.

@item GNU General Public License

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA.

@end table
@end copying
@ifnottex
@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* gcc: (gcc).                  The GNU Compiler Collection.
@end direntry
This file documents the use of the Gjdoc Java documentation framework.
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@sp 1
@end ifnottex

@setchapternewpage odd
@c @shorttitlepage Using Gjdoc
@titlepage
@center @titlefont{Using Gjdoc}
@sp 2
@center @subtitlefont{A Documentation Generation Framework for Java Source Files}
@sp 3
@center Last updated 17 Feb 2005
@sp 1

@center for Gjdoc @value{VERSION}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
For Gjdoc Version @value{VERSION}@*
@sp 1
@c Published by:
@c @multitable @columnfractions 0.5 0.5
@c @item GNU Press
@c @tab Website: www.gnupress.org
@c @item a division of the
@c @tab General: @tex press@@gnu.org @end tex
@c @item Free Software Foundation
@c @tab Orders:  @tex sales@@gnu.org @end tex
@c @item 59 Temple Place Suite 330
@c @tab Tel 617-542-5942
@c @item Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA
@c @tab Fax 617-542-2652
@c @end multitable
@c @sp 2
@c @ifset FSFPRINT
@c Update this ISBN when printing a new edition.
@c @acronym{ISBN} 1-882114-39-6
@c 
@c Cover art by Gary M. Torrisi.  Cover design by Jonathan Richard.
@c @end ifset
@c @ifclear FSFPRINT
@c Last printed October 2003 for GCC 3.3.1.@*
@c Printed copies are available for $45 each.
@c @end ifclear
@c @sp 1
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@summarycontents
@contents
@page

@node Top,,, (DIR)
@top Introduction
@cindex introduction

This manual documents how to use the Gjdoc documentation framework.
It corresponds to Gjdoc version @value{VERSION}.

@menu
* Invoking Gjdoc::  Command options supported by @samp{gjdoc}.
* Other Doclets::   Using Doclets other than the Standard Doclet.
* Gjdoc Concepts::  Concepts of the Gjdoc Documentation Framework.
* Option Index::    Index to command line options.
* Keyword Index::   Index of concepts and symbol names.

* License::         Conditions for using and copying this documentation.
@end menu

@include invoke.texi

@node License
@unnumbered License
@cindex license

This documentation is dual-licensed under the GNU Free Documentation
License and the GNU General Public License.

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* GNU General Public License::
@end menu

@lowersections
@include gpl.texi
@include fdl.texi
@raisesections

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GFDL
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@c @include fdl.texi

@c @include contrib.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Indexes
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Option Index
@unnumbered Option Index

Gjdoc's command line options are indexed here without any initial @samp{-}
or @samp{--}.

@printindex op

@node Keyword Index
@unnumbered Keyword Index

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Epilogue
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye
